README.md, before:

# pandasaurus_cxg

STATUS: early Beta

A library for retreiving and leveraging the semantic context of ontogy annotation in [CxG standard](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md) [AnnData files](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Slide summarising intended functionality
![image](https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/assets/112839/3082dcd2-dd2f-469d-9076-4eabcc83130d)

## Installation

Available on [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/pandasaurus-cxg/0.1.1/)

$ pip3 install pandasaurus_cxg

## Usage

The `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer` classes can be used both individually and in conjunction with the `AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer` wrapper class. The `AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer` class serves as a convenient way to leverage the functionalities of both `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer`.

### Using AnndataEnricher and AnndataAnalyzer Individually

You can use the `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer` classes separately to perform specific tasks on your data. For instance, `AnndataEnricher` facilitates data enrichment, while `AnndataAnalyzer` provides various analysis tools for Anndata objects.

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.anndata_enricher import AnndataEnricher
ade = AnndataEnricher.from_file_path("test/data/modified_human_kidney.h5ad")
ade.simple_enrichment()
ade.minimal_slim_enrichment(["blood_and_immune_upper_slim"])
```

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.anndata_analyzer import AnndataAnalyzer
ada = AnndataAnalyzer.from_file_path("./immune_example.h5ad", author_cell_type_list = ['subclass.full', 'subclass.l3', 'subclass.l2', 'subclass.l1', 'class', 'author_cell_type'])
ada.co_annotation_report()
```

### Using AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer Wrapper

The AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer class wraps the functionality of both AnndataEnricher and AnndataAnalyzer, offering a seamless way to perform enrichment and analysis in one go.

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.enrichment_analysis import AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer
from pandasaurus_cxg.graph_generator.graph_generator import GraphGenerator
aea = AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer("test/data/modified_human_kidney.h5ad")
aea.contextual_slim_enrichment()
aea.co_annotation_report()
gg = GraphGenerator(aea)
gg.generate_rdf_graph()
gg.set_label_adding_priority(["class", "cell_type", "subclass.l1", "subclass.l1", "subclass.full", "subclass.l2", "subclass.l3"])
gg.add_label_to_terms()
gg.enrich_rdf_graph()
gg.save_rdf_graph(file_name="kidney_new", _format="ttl")
```
More examples and detailed explanation can be found in jupyter notebook given in [Snippets](#Snippets)

## Snippets

https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/blob/main/walkthrough.ipynb

## Roadmap

https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/blob/main/ROADMAP.md

Commit message:

Added 'Detailed installation guide for pygraphviz issue' section

README.md, after:

# pandasaurus_cxg

STATUS: early Beta

A library for retrieving and leveraging the semantic context of ontology annotation in [CxG standard](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md) [AnnData files](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Slide summarising intended functionality
![image](https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/assets/112839/3082dcd2-dd2f-469d-9076-4eabcc83130d)

## Installation

Available on [PyPi](https://pypi.org/project/pandasaurus-cxg/0.1.1/)

$ pip3 install pandasaurus_cxg

#### Detailed installation guide for pygraphviz issue

During package installation, sometimes the pygraphviz package installation is failing on **macOS** due to Graphviz may be 
installed in a location that is not on the default search path. In this case, it may be necessary to manually 
specify the path to the graphviz include and/or library directories. To do that use following instructions and install 
pygraphviz manually.

```
brew install graphviz
export CFLAGS="-I $(brew --prefix graphviz)/include"
export LDFLAGS="-L $(brew --prefix graphviz)/lib"
pip install pygraphviz
```

## Usage

The `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer` classes can be used both individually and in conjunction with the `AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer` wrapper class. The `AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer` class serves as a convenient way to leverage the functionalities of both `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer`.

### Using AnndataEnricher and AnndataAnalyzer Individually

You can use the `AnndataEnricher` and `AnndataAnalyzer` classes separately to perform specific tasks on your data. For instance, `AnndataEnricher` facilitates data enrichment, while `AnndataAnalyzer` provides various analysis tools for Anndata objects.

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.anndata_enricher import AnndataEnricher
ade = AnndataEnricher.from_file_path("test/data/modified_human_kidney.h5ad")
ade.simple_enrichment()
ade.minimal_slim_enrichment(["blood_and_immune_upper_slim"])
```

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.anndata_analyzer import AnndataAnalyzer
ada = AnndataAnalyzer.from_file_path("./immune_example.h5ad", author_cell_type_list = ['subclass.full', 'subclass.l3', 'subclass.l2', 'subclass.l1', 'class', 'author_cell_type'])
ada.co_annotation_report()
```

### Using AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer Wrapper

The AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer class wraps the functionality of both AnndataEnricher and AnndataAnalyzer, offering a seamless way to perform enrichment and analysis in one go.

```python
from pandasaurus_cxg.enrichment_analysis import AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer
from pandasaurus_cxg.graph_generator.graph_generator import GraphGenerator
aea = AnndataEnrichmentAnalyzer("test/data/modified_human_kidney.h5ad")
aea.contextual_slim_enrichment()
aea.co_annotation_report()
gg = GraphGenerator(aea)
gg.generate_rdf_graph()
gg.set_label_adding_priority(["class", "cell_type", "subclass.l1", "subclass.l1", "subclass.full", "subclass.l2", "subclass.l3"])
gg.add_label_to_terms()
gg.enrich_rdf_graph()
gg.save_rdf_graph(file_name="kidney_new", _format="ttl")
```
More examples and detailed explanation can be found in jupyter notebook given in [Snippets](#Snippets)

## Snippets

https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/blob/main/walkthrough.ipynb

## Roadmap

https://github.com/INCATools/pandasaurus_cxg/blob/main/ROADMAP.md
